In 1902, British physician Archibald Garrod was the first to suggest that genes dictate phenotypes through enzymes, proteins that catalyze specific chemical reactions in the cell. He postulated that the symptoms of an inherited disease reflect an inability to make a particular enzyme. For example, people with a disease called alkaptonuria have black urine because it contains a chemical called alkapton. Garrod reasoned that these people cannot make an enzyme that breaks down alkapton, so the chemical is expelled in their urine. ENDLINE
Several decades later, research supported Garrod’s hypothesis that a gene dictates the production of a specific enzyme. Biochemists learned that cells synthesize and degrade most organic molecules via metabolic pathways, in which each chemical reaction in a sequence is catalyzed by a specific enzyme (see Concept 6.1). Such metabolic pathways lead, for instance, to the synthesis of the pigments that give the brown donkey in Figure 14.1 its fur color or fruit flies (Drosophila) their eye color (see Figure 12.3). In the 1930s, the American geneticist George Beadle and his French colleague Boris Ephrussi speculated that in Drosophila each mutation affecting eye color blocks pigment synthesis at a specific step by preventing production of the enzyme that catalyzes that step. But neither the chemical reactions nor the enzymes that catalyze them were known. ENDLINE
A breakthrough in demonstrating the relationship between genes and enzymes came a few years later at Stanford University, where Beadle and Edward Tatum began experimenting with the bread mold Neurospora crassa. Unlike the diploid organisms studied by Mendel (peas) and T. H. Morgan (fruit flies), Neurospora is a haploid species. In order to observe a change in a mutant’s phenotype, Beadle and Tatum needed to disable just one allele (rather than two) of a protein-coding gene required for a specific metabolic activity. By cleverly electing to work with Neurospora, they could cause a mutation in one allele in a cell and directly deduce the function of the wild-type gene. ENDLINE
Another advantage was that Neurospora has modest food requirements. For this species, the minimal medium, the culture containing minimal nutrients for growth of wild-type cells, is a simple solution of inorganic salts, glucose, and the vitamin biotin. On a gel-like substance called agar, saturated with minimal medium, single wild-type cells can synthesize all the other nutrients they need for growth (such as amino acids), dividing repeatedly and forming visible colonies of genetically identical cells. ENDLINE
Beadle and Tatum generated different “nutritional mutants” of Neurospora cells, each of which was unable to synthesize a particular essential nutrient. Such cells could not grow on minimal medium but could grow on complete medium, which contains all nutrients needed for growth, including any that a mutant cell can’t synthesize. For Neurospora, the complete medium consists of minimal medium supplemented with all 20 amino acids and a few other nutrients. Beadle and Tatum hypothesized that in each nutritional mutant, the gene for the enzyme that synthesizes a particular nutrient had been disabled. Figure 14.2 summarizes their experimental approach, in which they tested each type of mutant to determine which nutrient it was unable to synthesize. ENDLINE
Beadle and Tatum amassed a valuable collection of mutant strains of Neurospora, cataloguing defects not only by the type of metabolic pathway but also by different steps within each pathway. For example, a series of experiments on mutants requiring the amino acid arginine revealed that they could be grouped into distinct classes, each corresponding to a particular blocked step in the biochemical pathway for arginine synthesis. Presumably, the enzyme that normally catalyzes that step was unable to do so as a result of a mutation in its encoding gene (Figure 14.3). ENDLINE
Beadle and Tatum concluded that, taken together, the collected results provided strong support for their so-called one gene–one enzyme hypothesis: that the function of a gene is to dictate the production of a specific enzyme. Further support for this hypothesis came from experiments that identified the specific enzymes lacking in the mutants. Beadle and Tatum shared a Nobel Prize in 1958 for “their discovery that genes act by regulating definite chemical events,” in the words of the Nobel committee. Their experimental approach of disabling genes and observing the results plays a central role in genetic research today. ENDLINE
Today, we know of countless examples in which a mutation in a gene causes a faulty enzyme that in turn leads to an identifiable condition. The albino donkeys in Figure 14.1 lack a key enzyme called tyrosinase in the metabolic pathway that produces melanin, a dark pigment. The absence of melanin causes white fur and other effects throughout an albino donkey’s body. Its nose, ears, and hooves, as well as its eyes, are pink because no melanin is present to mask the reddish color of the blood vessels that run through those structures. ENDLINE
As researchers learned more about proteins, they made revisions to the one gene–one enzyme hypothesis. First of all, not all proteins are enzymes. Keratin, the structural protein of animal hair, and the hormone insulin are two examples of nonenzyme proteins. Because proteins that are not enzymes are nevertheless gene products, molecular biologists began to think in terms of one gene–one protein. However, many proteins are constructed from two or more different polypeptide chains, and each polypeptide is specified by its own gene. For example, hemoglobin, the oxygen-transporting protein of vertebrate red blood cells, contains two kinds of polypeptides, and thus two genes code for this protein, one for each type of polypeptide (see Figure 3.23). Beadle and Tatum’s idea was therefore restated as the one gene–one polypeptide hypothesis. Even this description is not entirely accurate, though. First, in many cases, a eukaryotic gene can code for a set of closely related polypeptides via a process called alternative splicing, which you will learn about later in this chapter. Second, quite a few genes code for RNA molecules that have important functions in cells even though they are never translated into protein. For now, we will focus on genes that do code for polypeptides. (Note that it is common to refer to these gene products as proteins—a practice you’ll encounter in this text—rather than more precisely as polypeptides.) ENDLINE
Genes provide the instructions for making specific proteins, but a gene does not build a protein directly. The bridge between DNA and protein synthesis is the nucleic acid RNA. RNA is chemically similar to DNA except that it contains ribose instead of deoxyribose as its sugar and has the nitrogenous base uracil rather than thymine (see Figure 3.27). Thus, each nucleotide along a DNA strand has A, G, C, or T as its base, and each nucleotide along an RNA strand has A, G, C, or U as its base. An RNA molecule usually consists of a single strand ENDLINE
It is customary to describe the flow of information from gene to protein in linguistic terms. Just as specific sequences of letters communicate information in a language like English, both nucleic acids and proteins are polymers with specific sequences of monomers that convey information. In DNA or RNA, the monomers are the four types of nucleotides, which differ in their nitrogenous bases. Genes are typically hundreds or thousands of nucleotides long, each gene having a specific sequence of nucleotides. Each polypeptide of a protein also has monomers arranged in a particular linear order (the protein’s primary structure; see Figure 3.22), but its monomers are amino acids. Thus, nucleic acids and proteins contain information written in two different chemical languages. Getting from DNA to protein requires two major stages: transcription and translation. ENDLINE
Transcription is the synthesis of RNA using information in the DNA. The two nucleic acids are written in different forms of the same language, and the information is simply transcribed, or “rewritten,” from DNA to RNA. Just as a DNA strand provides a template for making a new complementary strand during DNA replication (see Concept 13.2), it also can serve as a template for assembling a complementary sequence of RNA nucleotides. For a protein-coding gene, the resulting RNA molecule is a faithful transcript of the gene’s protein-building instructions. This type of RNA molecule is called messenger RNA (mRNA) because it carries a genetic message from the DNA to the protein-synthesizing machinery of the cell. (Transcription is the general term for the synthesis of any kind of RNA on a DNA template. Later, you’ll learn about some other types of RNA produced by transcription.) ENDLINE
Translation is the synthesis of a polypeptide using the information in the mRNA. During this stage, there is a change in language: The cell must translate the nucleotide sequence of an mRNA molecule into the amino acid sequence of a polypeptide. The sites of translation are ribosomes, molecular complexes that facilitate the orderly linking of amino acids into polypeptide chains. ENDLINE
Transcription and translation occur in all organisms. Because most studies have used bacteria and eukaryotic cells, they are our main focus in this chapter. While our understanding of transcription and translation in archaea lags behind, we do know that archaeal cells share some features of gene expression with bacteria and others with eukaryotes. ENDLINE
The basic mechanics of transcription and translation are similar for bacteria and eukaryotes, but there is an important difference in the flow of genetic information within the cells. Bacteria do not have nuclei. Therefore, nuclear membranes do not separate bacterial DNA and mRNA from ribosomes and the other protein-synthesizing equipment (Figure 14.4a). This lack of compartmentalization allows translation of an mRNA to begin while its transcription is still in progress, as you’ll see later. By contrast, eukaryotic cells have nuclei. The presence of a nuclear envelope separates transcription from translation in space and time (Figure 14.4b). Transcription occurs in the nucleus, but the mRNA must be transported to the cytoplasm for translation. Before eukaryotic RNA transcripts from protein-coding genes can leave the nucleus, they are modified in various ways to produce the final, functional mRNA. The transcription of a protein-coding eukaryotic gene results in pre-mRNA, and further processing yields the finished mRNA. The initial RNA transcript from any gene, including those specifying RNA that is not translated into protein (such as tRNA and rRNA, which will be described in Concept 14.4), is more generally called a primary transcript. ENDLINE
To summarize: Genes program protein synthesis via genetic messages in the form of messenger RNA. Put another way, cells are governed by a molecular chain of command with a directional flow of genetic information, This concept was dubbed the central dogma by Francis Crick in 1956. In the 1970s, however, scientists were surprised to discover some enzymes that use RNA molecules as templates for DNA synthesis (which we’ll cover in Concept 17.2). Still, these exceptions do not invalidate the idea that, in general, genetic information flows from DNA to RNA to protein. Now let’s discuss how the instructions for assembling amino acids into a specific order are encoded in nucleic acids. ENDLINE
When biologists began to suspect that the instructions for protein synthesis were encoded in DNA, they recognized a problem: There are only four nucleotide bases to specify 20 amino acids. Thus, the genetic code cannot be a language like Chinese, where each written symbol corresponds to a word. How many nucleotides, then, would turn out to correspond to an amino acid? ENDLINE
If each kind of nucleotide base were translated into an amino acid, only four amino acids could be specified, one per nucleotide base. Would a language of two-letter code words suffice? The two-nucleotide sequence AG, for example, could specify one amino acid, and GT could specify another. Since there are four possible nucleotide bases in each position, this would give us 16 (that is,4^2 ) possible arrangements—still not enough to code for all 20 amino acids. ENDLINE
Triplets of nucleotide bases are the smallest units of uniform length that can code for all the amino acids. If each arrangement of three consecutive nucleotide bases specifies an amino acid, there can be 64 (that is, 4^3 ) possible code words—more than enough to specify all the amino acids. Experiments have verified that the flow of information from gene to protein is based on a triplet code: The genetic instructions for a polypeptide chain are written in the DNA as a series of nonoverlapping, three-nucleotide words. The series of words in a gene is transcribed into a complementary series of non-overlapping, three-nucleotide words in mRNA, which is then translated into a chain of amino acids (Figure 14.5). ENDLINE
For each gene, one DNA strand functions as a template for transcription of RNAs, such as mRNA. The base-pairing rules for DNA synthesis also guide transcription, except that uracil (U) takes the place of thymine (T) in RNA. During translation, the mRNA is read as a sequence of nucleotide triplets, called codons. Each codon specifies an amino acid to be added to the growing polypeptide chain. The mRNA is read in the 5 prime to 3 prime direction.  ENDLINE
During transcription, the gene determines the sequence of nucleotide bases along the length of the RNA molecule that is being synthesized. For each gene, only one of the two DNA strands is transcribed. This strand is called the template strand because it provides the pattern, or template, for the sequence of nucleotides in an RNA transcript. For any given gene, the same strand is used as the template every time the gene is transcribed. However, farther along on the same chromosomal DNA molecule, the opposite strand may function as the template for a different gene. The strand that is used as the template is determined by the orientation of the enzyme that transcribes genes, which in turn depends on the particular DNA sequences associated with each particular gene. ENDLINE
An mRNA molecule is complementary rather than identical to its DNA template because RNA nucleotides are assembled on the template according to base-pairing rules (see Figure 14.5). The pairs are similar to those that form during DNA replication, except that U (the RNA substitute for T) pairs with A and the mRNA nucleotides contain ribose instead of deoxyribose. Like a new strand of DNA, the RNA molecule is synthesized in an antiparallel direction to the template strand of DNA. ENDLINE
In the example in Figure 14.5, the nucleotide triplet ACC along the DNA template strand (written as 3 print - ACC - 5 prime ) provides a template for 5 prime - UGG - 3 prime in the mRNA molecule. The mRNA nucleotide triplets are called codons, and they are customarily written in the 5 prime to 3 prime direction. In our example, UGG is the codon for the amino acid tryptophan (abbreviated Trp). The term codon is also used for the DNA nucleotide triplets along the nontemplate strand. These codons are complementary to the template strand and thus identical in sequence to the mRNA (except for T’s instead of U’s). For this reason, the nontemplate DNA strand is often called the coding strand; by convention, the coding strand sequence is used when a gene’s sequence is reported. ENDLINE
During translation, the sequence of codons along an mRNA molecule is decoded, or translated, into a sequence of amino acids making up a polypeptide chain. The codons are read by the translation machinery in the 5 prime to 3 prime direction along the mRNA. Each codon specifies which one of the 20 amino acids will be incorporated at the corresponding position along a polypeptide. Because codons are nucleotide triplets, the number of nucleotides making up a genetic message must be three times the number of amino acids in the protein product. For example, 300 nucleotides along an mRNA strand code for 100 amino acids in a polypeptide. ENDLINE
Molecular biologists cracked the genetic code of life in the early 1960s when a series of elegant experiments disclosed the amino acid translations of each of the RNA codons. The first codon was deciphered in 1961 by Marshall Nirenberg, of the National Institutes of Health, and colleagues. They synthesized an artificial mRNA made up of only uracil-bearing nucleotides, thus containing only one codon (UUU) over and over. When added to a test-tube mixture that contained all 20 amino acids, ribosomes, and the other components required for protein synthesis, the “poly-U” mRNA was translated into a polypeptide containing many units of phenylalanine amino acids (Phe), strung together as a polyphenylalanine chain. Thus, Nirenberg determined that the mRNA codon UUU specifies the amino acid phenylalanine. Soon, the amino acids specified by the codons AAA, GGG, and CCC were determined in the same way. ENDLINE
Although more elaborate techniques were required to decode mixed triplets such as AUA and CGA, all 64 codons were deciphered by the mid-1960s. As Figure 14.6 shows, 61 of the 64 triplets code for amino acids. The other three codons act as “stop” signals, or termination codons, marking the end of translation. Notice that the codon AUG has a dual function: It codes for the amino acid methionine (Met, or M) and also functions as a “start” signal, or initiation codon. Genetic messages usually begin with the mRNA codon AUG, which signals the protein-synthesizing machinery to begin translating the mRNA at that location. (Because AUG also stands for methionine, polypeptide chains all begin with methionine when they are synthesized. However, an enzyme may subsequently remove this starter amino acid from the chain.) ENDLINE
Notice in Figure 14.6 that there is redundancy in the genetic code, but no ambiguity. For example, although codons GAA and GAG both specify glutamic acid (redundancy), neither of them ever specifies any other amino acid (no ambiguity). The redundancy in the code is not altogether random. In many cases, codons that are synonyms for a particular amino acid differ only in the third nucleotide base of the triplet. We’ll consider the significance of this redundancy later in the chapter. ENDLINE
Our ability to extract the intended message from a written language depends on reading the symbols in the correct groupings—that is, in the correct reading frame. Consider this statement: “The red dog ate the bug.” Group the letters incorrectly by starting at the wrong point, and the result will probably be gibberish: for example, “her edd oga tet heb ug.” The reading frame is also important in the molecular language of cells. The short stretch of polypeptide shown in Figure 14.5, for instance, will be made correctly only if the mRNA nucleotides are read from left to right  in the groups of three shown in the figure: UGG UUU GGC UCA. Although a genetic message is written with no spaces between the codons, the cell’s protein-synthesizing machinery reads the message as a series of nonoverlapping three-letter words. The message is not read as a series of overlapping words—UGGUUU, and so on—which would convey a very different message. ENDLINE
EVOLUTION The genetic code is nearly universal, shared by organisms from the simplest bacteria to the most complex plants and animals. The mRNA codon CCG, for instance, is translated as the amino acid proline in all organisms whose genetic code has been examined. In laboratory experiments, genes can be transcribed and translated after being transplanted from one species to another, sometimes with quite striking results, as shown in Figure 14.7. Bacteria can be programmed by the insertion of human genes to synthesize certain human proteins for medical use, such as insulin. Such applications have produced many exciting developments in the area of genetic engineering (see Concept 13.4). The evolutionary significance of the code’s near universality is clear. A language shared by all living things must have been operating very early in the history of life—early enough to be present in the common ancestor of all present-day organisms. A shared genetic vocabulary is a reminder of the kinship of all life. 