Messenger RNA, the carrier of information from DNA to the cell’s protein-synthesizing machinery, is transcribed from the template strand of a gene. An enzyme called an RNA polymerase pries the two strands of DNA apart and joins together RNA nucleotides complementary to the DNA template strand, thus elongating the RNA polynucleotide (Figure 14.8). Like the DNA polymerases that function in DNA replication, RNA polymerases can assemble a polynucleotide only in its 5 prime to 3 prime direction, adding onto its 3 prime end. Unlike DNA polymerases, however, RNA polymerases are able to start a chain from scratch; they don’t need to add the first nucleotide onto a pre-existing primer. ENDLINE
Specific sequences of nucleotides along the DNA mark where transcription of a gene begins and ends. The DNA sequence where RNA polymerase attaches and initiates transcription is known as the promoter; in bacteria, the sequence that signals the end of transcription is called the terminator. (The termination mechanism is different in eukaryotes; we’ll describe it later.) Molecular biologists refer to the direction of transcription as “downstream” and the other direction as “upstream.” These terms are also used to describe the positions of nucleotide sequences within the DNA or RNA. Thus, the promoter sequence in DNA is said to be upstream from the terminator. The stretch of DNA downstream from the promoter that is transcribed into an RNA molecule is called a transcription unit. ENDLINE
Bacteria have a single type of RNA polymerase that synthesizes not only mRNA but also other types of RNA that function in gene expression, such as ribosomal RNA. In contrast, eukaryotes have at least three types of RNA polymerase in their nuclei; the one used for pre-mRNA synthesis is called RNA polymerase II. In the discussion that follows, we start with the features of mRNA synthesis common to both bacteria and eukaryotes and then describe some key differences. ENDLINE
The promoter of a gene includes within it the transcription start point—the nucleotide where RNA polymerase begins synthesizing the mRNA—and typically extends several dozen or more nucleotide pairs upstream from the start point. Based on interactions with proteins that will be discussed shortly, RNA polymerase binds in a precise location and orientation on the promoter. This in turn determines where transcription starts and which of the two strands of the DNA helix is used as the template. ENDLINE
Certain sections of a promoter are especially important for binding RNA polymerase in a way that makes transcription begin at the correct start point. In bacteria, part of the RNA polymerase itself specifically recognizes and binds to the promoter. In eukaryotes, a collection of proteins called transcription factors mediate the binding of RNA polymerase and the initiation of transcription. Only after transcription factors are attached to the promoter does RNA polymerase II bind to it. The whole complex of transcription factors and RNA polymerase II bound to the promoter is called a transcription initiation complex. Figure 14.9 shows the role of transcription factors and a crucial promoter DNA sequence called the TATA box in forming the initiation complex at a eukaryotic promoter. ENDLINE
The interaction between eukaryotic RNA polymerase II and transcription factors is an example of the importance of protein-protein interactions in controlling eukaryotic transcription. Once the appropriate transcription factors are firmly attached to the promoter DNA and the polymerase is bound to them in the correct orientation on the DNA, the enzyme unwinds the two DNA strands and begins transcribing the template strand at the start point. ENDLINE
As RNA polymerase moves along the DNA, it untwists the double helix, exposing about 10–20 DNA nucleotides at a time for pairing with RNA nucleotides (Figure 14.10). The enzyme adds nucleotides to the 3 prime end of the growing RNA molecule as it continues along the double helix. In the wake of this advancing wave of RNA synthesis, the new RNA molecule peels away from its DNA template, and the DNA double helix re-forms. Transcription progresses at a rate of about 40 nucleotides per second in eukaryotes. ENDLINE
A single gene can be transcribed simultaneously by several molecules of RNA polymerase following each other like trucks in a convoy. A growing strand of RNA trails off from each polymerase, with the length of each new strand reflecting how far along the template the enzyme has traveled from the start point (see the mRNA molecules in Figure 14.23). The congregation of many polymerase molecules simultaneously transcribing a single gene increases the amount of mRNA transcribed from it, which helps the cell make the encoded protein in large amounts. ENDLINE
The mechanism of termination differs between bacteria and eukaryotes. In bacteria, transcription proceeds through a terminator sequence in the DNA. The transcribed terminator (an RNA sequence) functions as the termination signal, causing the polymerase to detach from the DNA and release the transcript, which requires no further modification before translation. In eukaryotes, RNA polymerase II transcribes a sequence on the DNA called the polyadenylation signal sequence, which specifies a polyadenylation signal (AAUAAA) in the pre-mRNA. This is called a “signal” because when this stretch of six RNA nucleotides appears, it is immediately bound by certain proteins in the nucleus. Then, at a point about 10–35 nucleotides downstream from the AAUAAA signal, these proteins cut the RNA transcript free from the polymerase, releasing the pre-mRNA. The pre-mRNA then undergoes processing, the topic of the next section.