Enzymes in the eukaryotic nucleus modify pre-mRNA in specific ways before the genetic message is dispatched to the cytoplasm. During this RNA processing, both ends of the primary transcript are altered. Also, in most cases, certain interior sections of the RNA molecule are cut out and the remaining parts spliced together. These modifications produce an mRNA molecule ready for translation. ENDLINE
Each end of a pre-mRNA molecule is modified in a particular way (Figure 14.11). The 5 prime end, which is synthesized first, receives a 5ʹ cap, a modified form of a guanine (G) nucleotide added onto the 5 prime end after the first 20–40 nucleotides have been transcribed. The 3 prime end of the pre-mRNA molecule is also modified before the mRNA exits the nucleus. Recall that the pre-m RNA is cut and released soon after the polyadenylation signal, AAUAAA, is transcribed. At the 3 prime end, an enzyme then adds 50–250 more adenine (A) nucleotides, forming a poly-A tail. The 5 prime cap and poly-A tail share several important functions. First, they facilitate the export of the mature mRNA from the nucleus. Second, they help protect the mRNA from degradation by hydrolytic enzymes. And third, they help ribosomes attach to the 5 prime end of the mRNA once it reaches the cytoplasm. In addition to the cap and tail on a eukaryotic mRNA molecule, Figure 14.11 also shows the untranslated regions (UTRs) at the 5 prime and 3 prime ends of the m RNA (referred to as the 5 prime UTR and 3 prime UTR). The UTRs are parts of the mRNA that will not be translated into protein, but they have other functions, such as ribosome binding. ENDLINE
Enzymes modify the two ends of a eukaryotic pre-mRNA molecule. The modified ends may promote the export of mRNA from the nucleus, and they help protect the mRNA from degradation. When the mRNA reaches the cytoplasm, the modified ends, in conjunction with certain cytoplasmic proteins, facilitate ribosome attachment. The 5′ cap and poly-A tail are not translated into protein, nor are the regions called the 5′ untranslated region (5′ UTR) and 3′ untranslated region (3′ UTR). The pink segments are introns, which will be described shortly. ENDLINE
A remarkable stage of RNA processing in the eukaryotic nucleus is RNA splicing, in which large portions of the RNA molecule are removed and the remaining portions are reconnected. This cut-and-paste job is similar to editing a movie. The average length of a transcription unit along a human DNA molecule is about 27,000 nucleotide pairs, so the primary RNA transcript is also that long. However, the average-sized protein of 400 amino acids requires only 1,200 nucleotides in RNA to code for it. (Remember, each amino acid is encoded by a triplet of nucleotides.) This is because most eukaryotic genes and their RNA transcripts have long noncoding stretches of nucleotides, regions that are not translated. Even more surprising is that most of these noncoding sequences are interspersed between coding segments of the gene and thus between coding segments of the pre-mRNA. In other words, the sequence of DNA nucleotides that codes for a eukaryotic polypeptide is usually not continuous; it is split into segments.  ENDLINE
The noncoding segments of nucleic acid that lie between coding regions are called intervening sequences, or introns. The other regions are called exons, because they are eventually expressed, usually by being translated into amino acid sequences. (Exceptions include the UTRs of the exons at the ends of the RNA, which make up part of the mRNA but are not translated into protein. Because of these exceptions, you may prefer to think of exons as sequences of RNA that exit the nucleus.) The terms intron and exon are used for both RNA sequences and the DNA sequences that specify them. ENDLINE
In making a primary transcript from a gene, RNA polymerase II transcribes both introns and exons from the DNA, but the mRNA molecule that enters the cytoplasm is an abridged version (Figure 14.12). In the process of RNA splicing, the introns are cut out from the molecule and the exons joined together, forming an mRNA molecule with a continuous coding sequence. ENDLINE
The RNA molecule shown here codes for β-globin, one of the polypeptides of hemoglobin. The numbers under the RNA refer to codons; β-globin is 146 amino acids long. The β-globin gene and its pre-mRNA transcript have three exons, corresponding to sequences that will leave the nucleus as mRNA. (The 5′ UTR and 3′ UTR do not code for protein, but they are parts of exons because they remain in the mRNA.) During RNA processing, the introns are cut out and the exons spliced together. In many genes, the introns are much larger than the exons. ENDLINE
One important consequence of the presence of introns in genes is that a single gene can encode more than one kind of polypeptide. Many genes are known to give rise to two or more different polypeptides, depending on which segments are treated as exons during RNA processing; this is called alternative RNA splicing (see Figure 15.12). Because of alternative splicing, the number of different protein products an organism produces can be much greater than its number of genes. ENDLINE
How is pre-mRNA splicing carried out? The removal of introns is accomplished by a large complex made of proteins and small RNAs called a spliceosome. This complex binds to several short nucleotide sequences along the intron, including key sequences at each end (Figure 14.13). The intron is then released (and rapidly degraded), and the spliceosome joins together the two exons that flanked the intron. It turns out that the small RNAs in the spliceosome not only participate in the assembly of the spliceosome and recognition of the splice site but also catalyze the splicing process. ENDLINE
The idea of a catalytic role for the RNAs in the spliceosome arose from the discovery of ribozymes, RNA molecules that function as enzymes. In some organisms, RNA splicing can occur without proteins or even additional RNA molecules: The intron RNA functions as a ribozyme and catalyzes its own removal! For example, in the ciliate protist Tetrahymena, self-splicing occurs in the production of ribosomal RNA (rRNA), a component of the organism’s ribosomes. The pre-rRNA actually removes its own introns! The discovery of ribozymes invalidated the idea that all biological catalysts are proteins. ENDLINE
Three properties of RNA enable some RNA molecules to function as enzymes. First, because RNA is single-stranded, a region of an RNA molecule may base-pair, in an antiparallel arrangement, with a complementary region elsewhere in the same molecule; this gives the molecule a particular three-dimensional structure. A specific structure is essential to the catalytic function of ribozymes, just as it is for enzymatic proteins. Second, like certain amino acids in an enzymatic protein, some of the bases in RNA contain functional groups that can participate in catalysis. Third, the ability of RNA to hydrogen-bond with other nucleic acid molecules (either RNA or DNA) adds specificity to its catalytic activity. For example, complementary base pairing between the RNA of the spliceosome and the RNA of a primary RNA transcript precisely locates the region where the ribozyme catalyzes splicing. Later in this chapter, you’ll see how these properties of RNA also allow it to perform important noncatalytic roles in the cell, such as recognition of the three-nucleotide codons on mRNA.