In the process of translation, a cell “reads” a genetic message and builds a polypeptide accordingly. The message is a series of codons along an mRNA molecule, and the translator is called a transfer RNA (tRNA). The function of a tRNA is to transfer amino acids from the cytoplasmic pool of amino acids to a growing polypeptide in a ribosome. A cell keeps its cytoplasm stocked with all 20 amino acids, either by synthesizing them from other compounds or by taking them up from the surrounding solution. The ribosome, a structure made of proteins and RNAs, adds each amino acid brought to it by a tRNA to the growing end of a polypeptide chain (Figure 14.14). ENDLINE
As a molecule of mRNA is moved through a ribosome, codons are translated into amino acids, one by one. The translators, or interpreters, are tRNA molecules, each type with a specific nucleotide triplet called an anticodon at one end and a corresponding amino acid at the other end. A tRNA adds its amino acid cargo to a growing polypeptide chain after the anticodon hydrogen-bonds to the complementary codon on the mRNA. The figures that follow show some of the details of translation in a bacterial cell. ENDLINE
The key to translating a genetic message into a specific amino acid sequence is the fact that each tRNA enables translation of a given mRNA codon into a certain amino acid. This is possible because a tRNA bears a specific amino acid at one end of its three-dimensional structure, while at the other end is a nucleotide triplet that can base-pair with the complementary codon on mRNA. ENDLINE
A tRNA molecule consists of a single RNA strand that is only about 80 nucleotides long (compared to hundreds of nucleotides for most mRNA molecules). The presence of complementary stretches of nucleotide bases that can hydrogen-bond to each other allows this single strand to fold back on itself and form a molecule with a 3D structure. Flattened into one plane to clarify this base pairing, a tRNA molecule looks like a cloverleaf (Figure 14.15a). The tRNA actually twists and folds into a compact 3D structure that is roughly L-shaped (Figure 14.15b), with the 5′ and 3′ ends of the linear tRNA both located near one end of the structure. The protruding 3′ end acts as the attachment site for an amino acid. The loop extending from the other end of the L includes the anticodon, the particular nucleotide triplet that base-pairs to a specific mRNA codon. Thus, the structure of a tRNA molecule fits its function. ENDLINE
Anticodons are conventionally written 3 prime to 5 prime to align properly with codons written 5 prime to 3 prime (see Figure 14.14). (For base pairing, RNA strands must be antiparallel, like DNA.) As an example of how tRNAs work, consider the mRNA codon 5 prime -GGC- 3 prime, which is translated as the amino acid glycine. The tRNA that base-pairs with this codon by hydrogen bonding has -CCG- as its anticodon and carries glycine at its other end (see the incoming tRNA approaching the ribosome in Figure 14.14). As an mRNA molecule is moved through a ribosome, glycine will be added to the polypeptide chain whenever the codon 5 prime-GGC-3 prime is presented for translation. Codon by codon, the genetic message is translated as tRNAs position each amino acid, in the order prescribed, and the ribosome adds that amino acid onto the growing polypeptide chain. The tRNA molecule is a translator in the sense that, in the context of the ribosome, it can read a nucleic acid word (the mRNA codon) and interpret it as a protein word (the amino acid). ENDLINE
Like mRNA and other types of cellular RNA, transfer RNA molecules are transcribed from DNA templates. In a eukaryotic cell, tRNA, like mRNA, is made in the nucleus and then travels from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, where translation occurs. In both bacterial and eukaryotic cells, each tRNA molecule is used repeatedly, picking up its designated amino acid in the cytosol, depositing this cargo onto a polypeptide chain at the ribosome, and then leaving the ribosome, ready to pick up another of the same amino acid. ENDLINE
The accurate translation of a genetic message requires two instances of molecular recognition. First, a tRNA that binds to an mRNA codon specifying a particular amino acid must carry that amino acid, and no other, to the ribosome. The correct matching up of tRNA and amino acid is carried out by a family of related enzymes that are aptly named aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (Figure 14.16). The active site of each type of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase fits only a specific combination of amino acid and tRNA. (Regions of both the amino acid attachment end and the anticodon end of the tRNA are instrumental in ensuring the specific fit.) There are 20 different synthetases, one that joins each amino acid to the right tRNA; each synthetase is able to bind to all the different tRNAs that code for its particular amino acid. The synthetase catalyzes the covalent attachment of the amino acid to its tRNA in a process driven by the hydrolysis of ATP. The resulting aminoacyl tRNA, also called a charged tRNA, is released from the enzyme and is then available to deliver its amino acid to a growing polypeptide chain on a ribosome. ENDLINE
The second instance of molecular recognition is the pairing of the tRNA anticodon with the appropriate mRNA codon. If one tRNA type existed for each mRNA codon specifying an amino acid, there would be 61 tRNAs (see Figure 14.6). In bacteria, however, there are only about 45, signifying that some tRNAs must be able to bind to more than one codon. Such versatility is possible because the rules for base pairing between the third nucleotide base of a codon and the corresponding base of a tRNA anticodon are relaxed compared to those at other codon positions. For example, the nucleotide base U at the 5 prime end of a tRNA anticodon can pair with A or G in the third position (at the 3 prime end) of an mRNA codon. The flexible base pairing at this codon position is called wobble. Wobble explains why synonymous codons for an amino acid most often differ in their third nucleotide base but not in the other bases. Accordingly, a tRNA with the anticodon 3 prime-UCU- 5 prime can base-pair with either the mRNA codon 5 prime-AGA-3 prime or 5 prime-AGG-3 prime, both of which code for arginine (see Figure 14.6). ENDLINE
Although the ribosomes of bacteria and eukaryotes are very similar in structure and function, eukaryotic ribosomes are slightly larger and differ somewhat from bacterial ribosomes in their molecular composition. The differences are medically significant: Certain antibiotic drugs can inactivate bacterial ribosomes without affecting the ability of eukaryotic ribosomes to make proteins. These drugs, including tetracycline and streptomycin, are used to combat bacterial infections. ENDLINE
Ribosomes facilitate the specific coupling of tRNA anticodons with mRNA codons during protein synthesis. A ribosome consists of a large subunit and a small subunit, each made up of proteins and one or more ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) (Figure 14.17). In eukaryotes, the subunits are made in the nucleolus. Ribosomal RNA genes are transcribed, and the RNA is processed and assembled with proteins imported from the cytoplasm. Completed ribosomal subunits are then exported via nuclear pores to the cytoplasm. In both bacteria and eukaryotes, a large and a small subunit join to form a functional ribosome only when attached to an mRNA molecule. About one-third of the mass of a ribosome is made up of proteins; the rest consists of rRNAs, either three molecules (in bacteria) or four (in eukaryotes). Because cells contain thousands of ribosomes, rRNA is the most abundant type of RNA. ENDLINE
The structure of a ribosome reflects its function of bringing mRNA together with tRNAs carrying amino acids. The mRNA itself has a binding site for the ribosome. (In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you can work with DNA sequences representing this binding site in a group of E. coli genes.) The ribosome, in turn, has a binding site for mRNA, as well as three binding sites for tRNA (see Figure 14.17). The P site (peptidyl-tRNA binding site) holds the tRNA carrying the growing polypeptide chain, while the A site (aminoacyl-tRNA binding site) holds the tRNA carrying the next amino acid to be added to the chain. Discharged tRNAs leave the ribosome from the E site (exit site). The ribosome holds the tRNA and mRNA in close proximity and positions the new amino acid so that it can be added to the carboxyl end of the growing polypeptide. It then catalyzes the formation of the peptide bond. As the polypeptide becomes longer, it passes through an exit tunnel in the ribosome’s large subunit. When the polypeptide is complete, it is released through the exit tunnel. ENDLINE
How Can a Sequence Logo Be Used to Identify Ribosome Binding Sites on Bacterial mRNAs? When initiating translation, ribosomes bind to an mRNA at a ribosome binding site upstream of the 5 prime-AUG-3 prime start codon. Because mRNAs from different genes all bind to a ribosome, the genes encoding these mRNAs are likely to have a similar base sequence where the ribosomes bind. Therefore, candidate ribosome binding sites on mRNA can be identified by comparing DNA sequences (and thus the mRNA sequences) of multiple genes in a species, searching the region upstream of the start codon for shared (conserved) stretches of bases. In this exercise you will analyze DNA sequences from multiple such genes, represented by a visual graphic called a sequence logo. ENDLINE
How the Experiment Was Done The DNA sequences of 149 genes from the E. coli genome were aligned and analyzed using computer software. The aim was to identify similar base sequences—at the appropriate location in each gene—as potential ribosome binding sites. Rather than presenting the data as a series of 149 sequences aligned in a column (a sequence alignment), the researchers used a sequence logo.Data from the Experiment To show how sequence logos are made, the potential ribosome binding regions from 10 of the E. coli genes are shown in a sequence alignment (i), followed by the sequence logo derived from the aligned sequence (ii). Note that the DNA shown is the nontemplate (coding) strand, which is how DNA sequences are typically presented. ENDLINE
The widely accepted model is that rRNAs, not the ribosomal proteins, are primarily responsible for both the structure and the function of the ribosome. The proteins, which are largely on the exterior, support the shape changes of the rRNA molecules as they carry out catalysis during translation. Ribosomal RNA is the main constituent of the A and P sites and of the interface between the two ribosomal subunits; it also acts as the catalyst of peptide bond formation. Thus, a ribosome could actually be considered one colossal ribozyme! ENDLINE
We can divide translation, the synthesis of a polypeptide chain, into three stages: initiation, elongation, and termination. All three stages require protein “factors” that aid in the translation process. For certain aspects of chain initiation and elongation, energy is also required. It is provided by the hydrolysis of guanosine triphosphate (GTP). ENDLINE
The initiation stage of translation brings together an mRNA, a tRNA bearing the first amino acid of the polypeptide, and the two subunits of a ribosome. First, a small ribosomal subunit binds to both the mRNA and a specific initiator tRNA, which carries the amino acid methionine. In bacteria, the small subunit can bind these two in either order; it binds the mRNA at a specific RNA sequence, just upstream of the AUG start codon. In eukaryotes, the small subunit, with the initiator tRNA already bound, binds to the 5 prime cap of the mRNA and then moves, or scans, downstream along the mRNA until it reaches the AUG start codon, where the initiator tRNA hydrogen-bonds, as shown in step 1 of Figure 14.18. In both bacteria and eukaryotes, the AUG signals the start of translation; this is important because it establishes the codon reading frame for the mRNA. ENDLINE
The union of mRNA, initiator tRNA, and a small ribosomal subunit is followed by the attachment of a large ribosomal subunit, completing the translation initiation complex (see Figure 14.18). Proteins called initiation factors are required to bring all these components together. The cell also expends energy obtained by hydrolysis of a GTP molecule to form the initiation complex. At the completion of the initiation process, the initiator tRNA sits in the P site of the ribosome, and the vacant A site is ready for the next aminoacyl tRNA. Note that a polypeptide is always synthesized in one direction, from the initial methionine at the amino end, also called the N-terminus, toward the final amino acid at the carboxyl end, also called the C-terminus (see Figure 3.19). ENDLINE
In the elongation stage of translation, amino acids are added one by one to the previous amino acid at the C-terminus of the growing chain. Each addition involves several proteins called elongation factors and occurs in a three-step cycle described in Figure 14.19. Energy expenditure occurs in the first and third steps. Codon recognition requires hydrolysis of one molecule of GTP, which increases the accuracy and efficiency of this step. One more GTP is hydrolyzed to provide energy for the translocation step. ENDLINE
The mRNA is moved through the ribosome in one direction only, 5 prime end first; this is equivalent to the ribosome moving 5 prime to 3 prime on the mRNA. The main point is that the ribosome and the mRNA move relative to each other, unidirectionally, codon by codon. The elongation cycle takes less than a tenth of a second in bacteria and is repeated as each amino acid is added to the chain until the polypeptide is completed. The empty tRNAs that are released from the E site return to the cytoplasm, where they will be reloaded with the proper amino acid (see Figure 14.16). ENDLINE
The final stage of translation is termination (Figure 14.20). Elongation continues until a stop codon in the mRNA reaches the A site. The nucleotide base triplets UAG, UAA, and UGA (all written 5 prime to 3 prime ) do not code for amino acids but instead act as signals to stop translation. A release factor, a protein shaped like an aminoacyl tRNA, binds directly to the stop codon in the A site. The release factor causes the addition of a water molecule instead of an amino acid to the polypeptide chain. (Water molecules are abundant in the cytosol.) This reaction hydrolyzes (breaks) the bond between the completed polypeptide and the tRNA in the P site, releasing the polypeptide through the exit tunnel of the ribosome’s large subunit. The remainder of the translation assembly then comes apart in a multistep process, aided by other protein factors. Breakdown of the translation assembly requires the hydrolysis of two more GTP molecules. ENDLINE
During its synthesis, a polypeptide chain begins to coil and fold spontaneously as a consequence of its amino acid sequence (primary structure), forming a protein with a specific shape: a three-dimensional molecule with secondary and tertiary structure (see Figure 3.22). Thus, a gene determines primary structure, which in turn determines shape. ENDLINE
Additional steps—post-translational modifications—may be required before the protein can begin doing its particular job in the cell. Certain amino acids may be chemically modified by the attachment of sugars, lipids, phosphate groups, or other additions. Enzymes may remove one or more amino acids from the leading (amino) end of the polypeptide chain. In some cases, a polypeptide chain may be enzymatically cleaved into two or more pieces. In other cases, two or more polypeptides that are synthesized separately may come together, becoming the subunits of a protein that has quaternary structure. A familiar example is hemoglobin (see Figure 3.22). ENDLINE
In electron micrographs of eukaryotic cells active in protein synthesis, two populations of ribosomes are evident: free and bound (see Figure 4.9). Free ribosomes are suspended in the cytosol and mostly synthesize proteins that stay in the cytosol and function there. In contrast, bound ribosomes are attached to the cytosolic side of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or to the nuclear envelope. Bound ribosomes make proteins of the endomembrane system (see Figure 4.15) as well as proteins secreted from the cell, such as insulin. It is important to note that the ribosomes themselves are identical and can alternate between being free ribosomes one time they are used and bound ribosomes the next time. ENDLINE
What determines whether a ribosome is free in the cytosol or bound to rough ER? Polypeptide synthesis always begins in the cytosol as a free ribosome starts to translate an mRNA molecule. There the process continues to completion—unless the growing polypeptide itself cues the ribosome to attach to the ER. The polypeptides of proteins destined for the endomembrane system or for secretion are marked by a signal peptide, which targets the protein to the ER (Figure 14.21). The signal peptide, a sequence of about 20 amino acids at or near the leading end (N-terminus) of the polypeptide, is recognized as it emerges from the ribosome by a protein-RNA complex called a signal-recognition particle (SRP). This particle escorts the ribosome to a receptor protein built into the ER membrane. The receptor is part of a multiprotein translocation complex. Polypeptide synthesis continues there, and the growing polypeptide snakes across the membrane into the ER lumen via a protein pore. The signal peptide is usually removed by an enzyme. The rest of the completed polypeptide, if it is to be secreted from the cell, is released into the ER lumen (see Figure 14.21). Alternatively, if the polypeptide is to be a membrane protein, it remains partially embedded in the ER membrane. In either case, it travels in a transport vesicle to the plasma membrane (see Figure 5.8). Figure 14.21 ENDLINE
Other kinds of signal peptides are used to target polypeptides to mitochondria, chloroplasts, the interior of the nucleus, and other organelles that are not part of the endomembrane system. The critical difference in these cases is that translation is completed in the cytosol before the polypeptide is imported into the organelle. Translocation mechanisms also vary, but in all cases studied to date, the “postal zip codes” that address proteins for secretion or to cellular locations are signal peptides of some sort. Bacteria also employ signal peptides to target proteins to the plasma membrane for secretion. ENDLINE
In both bacteria and eukaryotes, multiple ribosomes translate an mRNA at the same time (Figure 14.22); that is, a single mRNA is used to make many copies of a polypeptide simultaneously. Once a ribosome is far enough past the start codon, a second ribosome can attach to the mRNA, eventually resulting in a number of ribosomes trailing along the mRNA. Such strings of ribosomes, called polyribosomes (or polysomes), can be seen with an electron microscope (see Figure 14.22); they can be either free or bound. They enable a cell to rapidly make many copies of a polypeptide. ENDLINE
Another way both bacteria and eukaryotes increase the number of copies of a polypeptide is by transcribing multiple mRNAs from the same gene. However, the coordination of the two processes—transcription and translation—differs in the two groups. The most important differences between bacteria and eukaryotes arise from the bacterial cell’s lack of compartmental organization. Like a one-room workshop, a bacterial cell ensures a streamlined operation by coupling the two processes. In the absence of a nucleus, it can simultaneously transcribe and translate the same gene (Figure 14.23), and the newly made protein can quickly diffuse to its site of function. ENDLINE
In bacterial cells, the translation of mRNA can begin as soon as the leading (5′) end of the mRNA molecule peels away from the DNA template. The micrograph (TEM) shows a stretch of E. coli DNA being transcribed by RNA polymerase molecules. Attached to each RNA polymerase molecule is a growing strand of mRNA, which is already being translated by ribosomes. The newly synthesized polypeptides are not visible in the micrograph but are shown in the diagram. ENDLINE
In contrast, the eukaryotic cell’s nuclear envelope segregates transcription from translation and provides a compartment for extensive RNA processing. This processing stage includes additional steps whose regulation can help coordinate the eukaryotic cell’s elaborate activities (see Concept 15.2). Figure 14.24 summarizes the path from gene to polypeptide in a eukaryotic cell.