If a point mutation occurs in a gamete or in a cell that gives rise to gametes, it may be transmitted to offspring and to a succession of future generations. If the mutation has an adverse effect on the phenotype of a person, the mutant condition is referred to as a genetic disorder or hereditary disease. For example, we can trace the genetic basis of sickle-cell disease to the mutation of a single nucleotide pair in the gene that encodes the β-globin polypeptide of hemoglobin. The change of a single nucleotide in the DNA’s template strand leads to an altered mRNA and the production of an abnormal protein (Figure 14.25; also see Figure 3.23). In individuals who are homozygous for the mutant allele, the sickling of red blood cells caused by the altered hemoglobin produces the multiple symptoms associated with sickle-cell disease (see Concept 11.4 and Figure 21.15). Another disorder caused by a point mutation is a heart condition called familial cardiomyopathy, which is responsible for some of the tragic incidents of sudden death in young athletes. Point mutations in several genes encoding muscle proteins have been identified, any of which can lead to this disorder. ENDLINE
Many mutations occur in regions outside of protein-coding genes, and any potential effect they have on the phenotype of the organism may be subtle and hard to detect. For this reason, here we’ll concentrate on mutations within protein-coding genes. Small-scale mutations within a gene can be divided into two general categories: (1) single nucleotide-pair substitutions and (2) nucleotide-pair insertions or deletions. Insertions and deletions can involve one or more nucleotide pairs. ENDLINE
A nucleotide-pair substitution is the replacement of one nucleotide and its partner with another pair of nucleotides (Figure 14.26a). Some substitutions have no effect on the encoded protein, owing to the redundancy of the genetic code. For example, if 3′-CCG-5′ on the template strand mutated to 3′-CCA-5′, the mRNA codon that used to be GGC would become GGU, but a glycine would still be inserted at the proper location in the protein (see Figure 14.6). In other words, a change in a nucleotide pair may transform one codon into another that is translated into the same amino acid. Such a change is an example of a silent mutation, which has no observable effect on the phenotype. (Silent mutations can occur outside genes as well.) Interestingly, there is evidence that some silent mutations may indirectly affect where or at what level the gene gets expressed, even though the actual protein is the same. ENDLINE
Substitutions that change one amino acid to another one are called missense mutations. Such a mutation may have little effect on the protein: The new amino acid may have properties similar to those of the amino acid it replaces, or it may be in a region of the protein where the exact sequence of amino acids is not essential to the protein’s function. ENDLINE
The nucleotide-pair substitutions of greatest interest are those that cause a major change in a protein. The alteration of a single amino acid in a crucial area of a protein—such as in the part of the β-globin subunit of hemoglobin shown in Figure 14.25 or in the active site of an enzyme—can significantly alter protein activity. Occasionally, such a mutation leads to an improved protein or one with novel capabilities, but much more often such mutations are neutral or detrimental, leading to a useless or less active protein that impairs cellular function. ENDLINE
A second example of a missense mutation is a mutation in the tyrosinase gene that causes the albino phenotype in the Asinara donkey. Recently, Italian researchers sequenced the tyrosinase gene in donkeys from this wild population and showed that a recessive mutation is responsible for the lack of pigment. In this gene, a C is changed to a G, resulting in a histidine being added to the protein instead of an aspartic acid. The changed amino acid is in a site in tyrosinase that normally binds a copper atom, and it makes the enzyme incapable of binding copper, rendering it nonfunctional. As in the case of sickle-cell disease, just one change in a nucleotide base results in a dramatic phenotypic change. ENDLINE
Substitution mutations are usually missense mutations; that is, the altered codon still codes for an amino acid and thus makes sense, although not necessarily the right sense. But a point mutation can also change a codon for an amino acid into a stop codon. This is called a nonsense mutation, and it causes translation to be terminated prematurely; the resulting polypeptide will be shorter than the polypeptide encoded by the normal gene. Most nonsense mutations lead to nonfunctional proteins. ENDLINE
Insertions and deletions are additions or losses of nucleotide pairs in a gene (Figure 14.26b). These mutations have a disastrous effect on the resulting protein more often than substitutions do. Insertion or deletion of nucleotides may alter the reading frame of the genetic message, the triplet grouping of nucleotides on the mRNA that is read during translation. Such a mutation, called a frameshift mutation, occurs whenever the number of nucleotides inserted or deleted is not a multiple of three. All nucleotides downstream of the deletion or insertion will be improperly grouped into codons; the result will be extensive missense mutations, usually ending sooner or later in a nonsense mutation that leads to premature termination. Unless the frameshift is very near the end of the gene, the protein is almost certain to be nonfunctional. Insertions and deletions also occur outside of coding regions; these are not called frameshift mutations, but can have effects on the phenotype—for instance, they can affect how a gene is expressed. ENDLINE
EVOLUTION Mutations are very important in the process of evolution because these changes are the source of every variant (allele) of any gene. Different alleles may encode proteins that function differently, and some proteins might work better in a given environment. The individual carrying a beneficial allele will be more fit and more likely to pass on that allele to future generations. Mutations therefore provide the raw material on which natural selection acts. ENDLINE
Mutations can arise in a number of ways. Errors during DNA replication or recombination can lead to nucleotide-pair substitutions, insertions, or deletions, as well as to mutations affecting longer stretches of DNA. If an incorrect nucleotide is added to a growing chain during replication, for example, the base on that nucleotide will then be mismatched with the nucleotide base on the other strand. In many cases, the error will be corrected by DNA proofreading and repair systems (see Concept 13.2). Otherwise, the incorrect base will be used as a template in the next round of replication, resulting in a mutation. Such mutations are called spontaneous mutations. It is difficult to calculate the rate at which such mutations occur. Rough estimates have been made of the rate of mutation during DNA replication for both E. coli and eukaryotes, and the numbers are similar: About one nucleotide in every 1010 is altered, and the change is passed on to the next generation of cells. ENDLINE
A number of physical and chemical agents, called mutagens, interact with DNA in ways that cause mutations. In the 1920s, Hermann Muller discovered that X-rays caused genetic changes in fruit flies, and he used X-rays to make Drosophila mutants for his genetic studies. But he also recognized an alarming implication of his discovery: X-rays and other forms of high-energy radiation pose hazards to the genetic material of people as well as laboratory organisms. Mutagenic radiation, a physical mutagen, includes ultraviolet (UV) light, which can cause disruptive thymine dimers in DNA (see Figure 13.21). ENDLINE
Chemical mutagens fall into several categories. Nucleotide analogs are chemicals that are similar to normal DNA nucleotides but that pair incorrectly during DNA replication. Some other chemical mutagens interfere with correct DNA replication by inserting themselves into the DNA and distorting the double helix. Still other mutagens cause chemical changes in bases that change their pairing properties. ENDLINE
Researchers have developed a variety of methods to test the mutagenic activity of chemicals. A major application of these tests is the preliminary screening of chemicals to identify those that may cause cancer. This approach makes sense because most carcinogens (cancer-causing chemicals) are mutagenic, and conversely, most mutagens are carcinogenic. ENDLINE
Our definition of a gene has evolved over the past few chapters, as it has through the history of genetics. We began with the Mendelian concept of a gene as a discrete unit of inheritance that affects a phenotypic character (Chapter 11). We saw that Morgan and his colleagues assigned such genes to specific loci on chromosomes (Chapter 12). We went on to view a gene as a region of specific nucleotide sequence along the length of the DNA molecule of a chromosome (Chapter 13). Finally, in this chapter, we have considered a functional definition of a gene as a DNA sequence that codes for a specific polypeptide chain or a functional RNA molecule, such as a tRNA. All these definitions are useful, depending on the context in which genes are being studied. ENDLINE
We have noted that merely saying a gene codes for a polypeptide is overly simplistic. Most eukaryotic genes contain noncoding segments (such as introns), so large portions of these genes have no corresponding segments in polypeptides. Molecular biologists also often include promoters and certain other regulatory regions of DNA within the boundaries of a gene. These DNA sequences are not transcribed, but they can be considered part of the functional gene because they must be present for transcription to occur. Our definition of a gene must also be broad enough to include the DNA that is transcribed into rRNA, tRNA, and other RNAs that are not translated. These genes have no polypeptide products but play crucial roles in the cell. Thus, we arrive at the following definition: A gene is a region of DNA that can be expressed to produce a final functional product that is either a polypeptide or an RNA molecule. ENDLINE
When considering phenotypes, however, it is useful to focus on genes that code for polypeptides. In this chapter, you have learned how a typical gene is expressed—by transcription into RNA and then translation into a polypeptide that forms a protein of specific structure and function. Proteins, in turn, bring about an organism’s observable phenotype. A given type of cell expresses only a subset of its genes. This is an essential feature in multicellular organisms: Gene expression is precisely regulated. We’ll explore gene regulation in the next chapter, beginning with the simpler case of bacteria and continuing with eukaryotes.