Once T. H. Morgan’s group showed that genes exist as parts of chromosomes (described in Concept 12.1), the two chemical components of chromosomes—DNA and protein—emerged as the leading candidates for the genetic material. Until the 1940s, the case for proteins seemed stronger: Biochemists had identified proteins as a class of macromolecules with great heterogeneity and specificity of function, essential requirements for the hereditary material. Moreover, little was known about nucleic acids, whose physical and chemical properties seemed far too uniform to account for the multitude of specific inherited traits exhibited by every organism. This view gradually changed as the role of DNA in heredity was worked out in studies of bacteria and the viruses that infect them, systems far simpler than fruit flies or humans. Let’s trace the search for the genetic material as a case study in scientific inquiry. ENDLINE
In 1928, a British medical officer named Frederick Griffith was trying to develop a vaccine against pneumonia. He was studying Streptococcus pneumoniae, a bacterium that causes pneumonia in mammals. Griffith had two strains (varieties) of the bacterium, one pathogenic (disease-causing) and one nonpathogenic (harmless). He was surprised to find that when he killed the pathogenic bacteria with heat and then mixed the cell remains with living bacteria of the nonpathogenic strain, some of the living cells became pathogenic (Figure 13.3). Furthermore, this newly acquired trait of pathogenicity was inherited by all the descendants of the transformed bacteria. Apparently, some chemical component of the dead pathogenic cells caused this heritable change, although the identity of the substance was not known. Griffith called the phenomenon transformation, now defined as a change in genotype and phenotype due to the assimilation of external DNA by a cell. Later work by Oswald Avery and others identified the transforming substance as DNA. ENDLINE
Scientists remained skeptical, however, since many still viewed proteins as better candidates for the genetic material. Also, many biologists were not convinced that bacterial genes would be similar in composition and function to those of more complex organisms. But the major reason for the continued doubt was that so little was known about DNA. ENDLINE
Additional evidence that DNA was the genetic material came from studies of viruses that infect bacteria. These viruses are called bacteriophages (meaning “bacteria-eaters”), or phages for short. Viruses are much simpler than cells. A virus is little more than DNA (or sometimes RNA) enclosed by a protective coat, which is often simply protein (Figure 13.4). To produce more viruses, a virus must infect a cell and take over the cell’s metabolic machinery. ENDLINE
Phages have been widely used as tools by researchers in molecular genetics. In 1952, Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase performed experiments showing that DNA is the genetic material of a phage known as T2. This is one of many phages that infect Escherichia coli (E. coli), a bacterium that normally lives in the intestines of mammals and is a model organism for molecular biologists. At that time, biologists already knew that T2, like many other phages, was composed almost entirely of DNA and protein. They also knew that the T2 phage could quickly turn an E. coli cell into a T2-producing factory that released many copies of new phages when the cell ruptured. Somehow, T2 could reprogram its host cell to produce viruses. But which viral component—protein or DNA—was responsible? ENDLINE
Hershey and Chase answered this question by devising an experiment showing that only one of the two components of T2 actually enters the E. coli cell during infection (Figure 13.5). In their experiment, they used a radioactive isotope of sulfur to tag protein in one batch of T2 and a radioactive isotope of phosphorus to tag DNA in a second batch. Because protein, but not DNA, contains sulfur, radioactive sulfur atoms were incorporated only into the protein of the phage. In a similar way, the atoms of radioactive phosphorus labeled only the DNA, not the protein, because nearly all the phage’s phosphorus is in its DNA. In the experiment, separate samples of nonradioactive E. coli cells were infected with the protein-labeled and DNA-labeled batches of T2. The researchers then tested the two samples shortly after the onset of infection to see which type of radioactively labeled molecule—protein or DNA—had entered the bacterial cells and would therefore have been capable of reprogramming them. ENDLINE
Further evidence that DNA is the genetic material came from the laboratory of biochemist Erwin Chargaff. DNA was known to be a polymer of nucleotides, each having three components: a nitrogenous (nitrogen-containing) base, a pentose sugar called deoxyribose, and a phosphate group (Figure 13.6). The base can be adenine (A), thymine (T), guanine (G), or cytosine (C). Chargaff analyzed the base composition of DNA from a number of different organisms. In 1950, he reported that the base composition of DNA varies from one species to another. For example, 32.8% of sea urchin DNA nucleotides have the base A, whereas only 24.7% of those from the bacterium E. coli have an A. This evidence of molecular diversity among species, which had been presumed absent from DNA, made DNA a more credible candidate for the genetic material. ENDLINE
Chargaff also noticed a peculiar regularity in the ratios of nucleotide bases. In the DNA of each species he studied, the number of adenines approximately equaled the number of thymines, and the number of guanines approximately equaled the number of cytosines. In sea urchin DNA, for example, the four bases are present in these percentages:  and  and . (The percentages are not exactly the same because of limitations in Chargaff’s techniques.) ENDLINE
These two findings became known as Chargaff’s rules: (1) DNA base composition varies between species, and (2) for each species, the percentages of A and T bases are roughly equal, as are those of G and C bases. In the Scientific Skills Exercise, you can use Chargaff’s rules to predict unknown percentages of nucleotide bases. The basis for these rules remained unexplained until the discovery of the double helix. ENDLINE
Once most biologists were convinced that DNA was the genetic material, the challenge was to determine how the structure of DNA could account for its role in inheritance. By the early 1950s, the arrangement of covalent bonds in a nucleic acid polymer was well established (see Figure 13.6), and researchers focused on discovering the three-dimensional structure of DNA. Among the scientists working on the problem were Linus Pauling, at the California Institute of Technology, and Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin, at King’s College in London. First to come up with the complete answer, however, were two scientists who were relatively unknown at the time—the American James Watson and the Englishman Francis Crick. ENDLINE
The brief but celebrated partnership that solved the puzzle of DNA structure began soon after Watson journeyed to Cambridge University, where Crick was studying protein structure with a technique called X-ray crystallography (see Figure 3.25). While visiting the laboratory of Maurice Wilkins, Watson saw an X-ray diffraction image of DNA produced by Wilkins’s accomplished colleague Rosalind Franklin (Figure 13.7). Images produced by X-ray crystallography are not actually pictures of molecules. The spots and smudges in the image were produced by X-rays that were diffracted (deflected) as they passed through aligned fibers of purified DNA. Watson was familiar with the type of X-ray diffraction pattern that helical molecules produce, and an examination of the photo that Wilkins showed him confirmed that DNA was helical in shape. The photo also augmented earlier data obtained by Franklin and others suggesting the width of the helix and the spacing of the nitrogenous bases along it. The pattern in this photo implied that the helix was made up of two strands, contrary to a three-stranded model that Linus Pauling had proposed a short time earlier. The presence of two strands accounts for the now-familiar term double helix. DNA is shown in some of its many different representations in Figure 13.8. ENDLINE
Watson and Crick began building models of a double helix that would conform to the X-ray measurements and what was then known about the chemistry of DNA, including Chargaff’s rules. They knew that Franklin had concluded that the sugar-phosphate backbones were on the outside of the DNA molecule. This arrangement was appealing because it put the negatively charged phosphate groups facing the aqueous surroundings, while the relatively hydrophobic nitrogenous bases were hidden in the interior. Watson constructed such a model (see Figure 13.2). In this model, the two sugar-phosphate backbones are antiparallel—that is, their subunits run in opposite directions (see Figure 13.8). You can imagine the overall arrangement as a rope ladder with rigid rungs. The side ropes represent the sugar-phosphate backbones, and the rungs represent pairs of nitrogenous bases. Now imagine twisting the ladder to form a helix. Franklin’s X-ray data indicated that the helix makes one full turn every 3.4 nm along its length. With the bases stacked just 0.34 nm apart, there are ten “rungs” of base pairs in each full turn of the helix. ENDLINE
The nitrogenous bases of the double helix are paired in specific combinations: adenine (A) with thymine (T), and guanine (G) with cytosine (C). It was mainly by trial and error that Watson and Crick arrived at this key feature of DNA. At first, Watson imagined that the bases paired like with like—for example, A with A and C with C. But this model did not fit the X-ray data, which suggested that the double helix had a uniform diameter. Why is this requirement inconsistent with like-with-like pairing of bases? Adenine and guanine are purines, nitrogenous bases with two organic rings, while cytosine and thymine are nitrogenous bases called pyrimidines, which have a single ring. Pairing a purine with a pyrimidine is the only combination that results in a uniform diameter for the double helix (Figure 13.9). ENDLINE
Watson and Crick reasoned that there must be additional specificity of pairing dictated by the structure of the bases. Each base has chemical side groups that can form hydrogen bonds with its appropriate partner: Adenine can form two hydrogen bonds with thymine and only thymine; guanine forms three hydrogen bonds with cytosine and only cytosine. In shorthand, A pairs with T, and G pairs with C (Figure 13.10). ENDLINE
The Watson-Crick model took into account Chargaff’s ratios and ultimately explained them. Wherever one strand of a DNA molecule has an A, the partner strand has a T. Similarly, a G in one strand is always paired with a C in the complementary strand. Therefore, in the DNA of any organism, the amount of adenine equals the amount of thymine, and the amount of guanine equals the amount of cytosine. (Modern DNA sequencing techniques have confirmed that the amounts are exactly equal.) Although the base-pairing rules dictate the combinations of nitrogenous bases that form the “rungs” of the double helix, they do not restrict the sequence of nucleotides along each DNA strand. The linear sequence of the four bases can be varied in countless ways, and each gene has a unique order, or base sequence. ENDLINE
In April 1953, Watson and Crick surprised the scientific world with a succinct, one-page paper that reported their molecular model for DNA: the double helix, which has since become the symbol of molecular biology. Watson and Crick, along with Maurice Wilkins, were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1962 for this work. (Sadly, Rosalind Franklin had died at the age of 38 in 1958 and was thus ineligible for the prize.) The beauty of the double helix model was that the structure of DNA suggested the basic mechanism of its replication. 