Now our model for deoxyribonucleic acid is, in effect, a pair of templates, each of which is complementary to the other. We imagine that prior to duplication the hydrogen bonds are broken, and the two chains unwind and separate. Each chain then acts as a template for the formation on to itself of a new companion chain, so that eventually we shall have two pairs of chains, where we only had one before. Moreover, the sequence of the pairs of bases will have been duplicated exactly. ENDLINE
Figure 13.11 illustrates the basic idea. Note that if you cover a DNA strand in Figure 13.11a, you can still determine its linear sequence of nucleotides by referring to the uncovered strand and applying the base-pairing rules. The two strands are complementary; each stores the information necessary to reconstruct the other. When a cell copies a DNA molecule, each strand serves as a template for ordering nucleotides into a new, complementary strand. Nucleotides line up along the template strand according to the base-pairing rules and are linked to form the new strands. Where there was one double-stranded DNA molecule at the beginning of the process, there are soon two, each an exact replica of the “parental” molecule. ENDLINE
This model of DNA replication remained untested for several years following publication of the DNA structure. The necessary experiments were simple in concept but difficult to perform. Watson and Crick’s model predicts that when a double helix replicates, each of the two daughter molecules will have one old strand, from the parental molecule, and one newly made strand. This semiconservative model can be distinguished from a conservative model of replication, in which the two parental strands somehow come back together after the process (that is, the parental molecule is conserved). In yet a third model, called the dispersive model, all four strands of DNA following replication have a mixture of old and new DNA (Figure 13.12). ENDLINE
Although mechanisms for conservative or dispersive DNA replication are not easy to come up with, these models remained possibilities until they could be ruled out. After two years of preliminary work at the California Institute of Technology in the late 1950s, Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl devised a clever experiment that distinguished between the three models, described in detail in Figure 13.13. Their results supported the semiconservative model of DNA replication, predicted by Watson and Crick, and their experiment is widely recognized among biologists as a classic example of elegant design. ENDLINE
Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl cultured E. coli for several generations in a medium containing nucleotide precursors labeled with a heavy isotope of nitrogen, . They then transferred the bacteria to a medium with only  , a lighter isotope. They took one sample after the first DNA replication and another after the second replication. They extracted DNA from the bacteria in the samples and then centrifuged each DNA sample to separate DNA of different densities. ENDLINE
Conclusion Meselson and Stahl compared their results to those predicted by each of the three models in Figure 13.12, as summarized in the diagram that follows. The first replication in the 14N medium produced a band of many molecules of hybrid  DNA. This result eliminated the conservative model. The second replication produced both light and hybrid DNA, a result that refuted the dispersive model and supported the semiconservative model. They therefore concluded that DNA replication is semiconservative. ENDLINE
The bacterium E. coli has a single chromosome of about 4.6 million nucleotide pairs. In a favorable environment, an E. coli cell can copy all of this DNA and divide to form two genetically identical daughter cells in considerably less than an hour. Each of your somatic cells has 46 DNA molecules in its nucleus, one long double-helical molecule per chromosome. In all, that represents about 6 billion nucleotide pairs, or over 1,000 times more DNA than is found in most bacterial cells. If we were to print the one-letter symbols for these bases (A, G, C, and T) the size of the type you are now reading, the 6 billion nucleotide pairs of information in a diploid human cell would fill about 1,400 biology textbooks. Yet it takes one of your cells just a few hours to copy this DNA during S phase of interphase. This replication of an enormous amount of genetic information is achieved with very few errors—only about one per 10 billion nucleotides. The copying of DNA is remarkable in its speed and accuracy. ENDLINE
More than a dozen enzymes and other proteins participate in DNA replication. Much more is known about how this “replication machine” works in bacteria (such as E. coli) than in eukaryotes, and we will describe the basic steps of the process for E. coli, except where otherwise noted. What scientists have learned about eukaryotic DNA replication suggests, however, that most of the process is fundamentally similar for prokaryotes and eukaryotes. ENDLINE
he replication of chromosomal DNA begins at particular sites called origins of replication, short stretches of DNA that have a specific sequence of nucleotides. The E. coli chromosome, like many other bacterial chromosomes, is circular and has a single origin. Proteins that initiate DNA replication recognize this sequence and attach to the DNA, separating the two strands and opening up a replication “bubble” (Figure 13.14a). Replication of DNA then proceeds in both directions until the entire molecule is copied. In contrast to a bacterial chromosome, a eukaryotic chromosome may have hundreds or even a few thousand replication origins. Multiple replication bubbles form and eventually fuse, thus speeding up the copying of the very long DNA molecules (Figure 13.14b). As in bacteria, eukaryotic DNA replication proceeds in both directions from each origin. After the parental strands separate, single-strand binding proteins bind to the unpaired DNA strands, keeping them from re-pairing. The untwisting of the double helix causes tighter twisting and strain ahead of the replication fork. Topoisomerase is an enzyme that helps relieve this strain by breaking, swiveling, and rejoining DNA strands. ENDLINE
Within a bubble, the unwound sections of parental DNA strands are available to serve as templates for the synthesis of new complementary DNA strands. However, the enzymes that synthesize DNA cannot initiate the synthesis of a polynucleotide; they can only add nucleotides to the end of an already-existing chain that is base-paired with the template strand. The initial nucleotide chain that is produced during DNA synthesis is actually a short stretch of RNA, not DNA. This RNA chain is called a primer and is synthesized by the enzyme primase (see Figure 13.15). Primase starts a complementary RNA chain with a single RNA nucleotide and adds RNA nucleotides one at a time, using the parental DNA strand as a template. The completed primer, generally 5–10 nucleotides long, is thus base-paired to the template strand. The new DNA strand will start from the  end of the RNA primer. ENDLINE
Enzymes called DNA polymerases catalyze the synthesis of new DNA by adding nucleotides to the  end of a preexisting chain. In E. coli, there are several DNA polymerases, but two of them appear to play the major roles in DNA replication: DNA polymerase III and DNA polymerase I. The situation in eukaryotes is more complicated, with at least 11 different DNA polymerases discovered so far, but the general principles are the same. ENDLINE
Most DNA polymerases require a primer and a DNA template strand along which complementary DNA nucleotides are lined up. In E. coli, DNA polymerase III (abbreviated DNA pol III) adds a DNA nucleotide to the RNA primer and then continues adding DNA nucleotides, which are complementary to the parental DNA template strand, to the growing end of the new DNA strand. The rate of elongation is about 500 nucleotides per second in bacteria and about 50 per second in human cells. ENDLINE
Each nucleotide to be added to a growing DNA strand consists of a sugar attached to a base and to three phosphate groups. You have already encountered such a molecule—ATP (adenosine triphosphate; see Figure 6.8). The only difference between the ATP of energy metabolism and dATP, the adenine nucleotide used to make DNA, is the sugar component, which is deoxyribose in the building block of DNA but ribose in ATP. Like ATP, the nucleotides used for DNA synthesis are chemically reactive, partly because their triphosphate tails have an unstable cluster of negative charge. DNA polymerase catalyzes the addition of each monomer to the growing end of a DNA strand via a condensation reaction, in which two phosphate groups are lost as a molecule of pyrophosphate . Subsequent hydrolysis of the pyrophosphate to two molecules of inorganic phosphate  is a coupled exergonic reaction that helps drive the polymerization reaction (Figure 13.16). ENDLINE
As we have noted previously, the two ends of a DNA strand are different, giving each strand directionality, like a one-way street (see Figure 13.6). In addition, the two strands of DNA in a double helix are antiparallel, meaning that they are oriented in opposite directions to each other, like the two sides of a divided street (see Figure 13.16). Therefore, the two new strands formed during DNA replication must also be antiparallel to their template strands. ENDLINE
The antiparallel arrangement of the double helix, together with a constraint on the function of DNA polymerases, has an important effect on how replication occurs. Because of their structure, DNA polymerases can add nucleotides only to the  end of a primer or growing DNA strand, never to the  end (see Figure 13.16). Thus, a new DNA strand can elongate only in the  direction. With this in mind, let’s examine one of the two replication forks in a bubble (Figure 13.17). Along one template strand, DNA polymerase III can synthesize a complementary strand continuously by elongating the new DNA in the mandatory  direction. DNA pol III remains in the replication fork on that template strand and continuously adds nucleotides to the new complementary strand as the fork progresses. The DNA strand made by this mechanism is called the leading strand. Only one primer is required for DNA pol III to synthesize the entire leading strand. ENDLINE
To elongate the other new strand of DNA in the mandatory (5 prime to 3 prime) direction, DNA pol III must work along the other template strand in the direction away from the replication fork. The DNA strand elongating in this direction is called the lagging strand. In contrast to the leading strand, which elongates continuously, the lagging strand is synthesized discontinuously, as a series of segments. These segments of the lagging strand are called Okazaki fragments, after Reiji Okazaki, the Japanese scientist who discovered them. The fragments are about 1,000–2,000 nucleotides long in E. coli and 100–200 nucleotides long in eukaryotes. ENDLINE
Figure 13.18 illustrates the steps in the synthesis of the lagging strand at one fork. Whereas only one primer is required on the leading strand, each Okazaki fragment on the lagging strand must be primed separately (STEP 1 and STEP 4). After DNA pol III forms an Okazaki fragment  (STEP 2 to STEP 4), another DNA polymerase, DNA pol I, replaces the RNA nucleotides of the adjacent primer with DNA nucleotides one at a time (STEP 5). But DNA pol I cannot join the final nucleotide of this replacement DNA segment to the first DNA nucleotide of the adjacent Okazaki fragment. Another enzyme, DNA ligase, accomplishes this task, joining the sugar-phosphate backbones of all the Okazaki fragments into a continuous DNA strand (STEP 6). ENDLINE
Synthesis of the leading strand and synthesis of the lagging strand occur concurrently and at the same rate. The lagging strand is so named because its synthesis is delayed slightly relative to synthesis of the leading strand; each new fragment of the lagging strand cannot be started until enough template has been exposed at the replication fork. ENDLINE
It is traditional—and convenient—to represent DNA polymerase molecules as locomotives moving along a DNA railroad track, but such a model is inaccurate in two important ways. First, the various proteins that participate in DNA replication actually form a single large complex, a “DNA replication machine.” Many protein-protein interactions facilitate the efficiency of this complex. For example, by interacting with other proteins at the fork, primase apparently acts as a molecular brake, slowing progress of the replication fork and coordinating the placement of primers and the rates of replication on the leading and lagging strands. Second, the DNA replication complex may not move along the DNA; rather, the DNA may move through the complex during the replication process. ENDLINE
In eukaryotic cells, multiple copies of the complex, perhaps grouped into “factories,” may be anchored to the nuclear matrix, a framework of fibers extending through the interior of the nucleus. Some experimental evidence supports a model in which two DNA polymerase molecules, one on each template strand, “reel in” the parental DNA and extrude newly made daughter DNA molecules. In this so-called trombone model, the lagging strand is also looped back through the complex (Figure 13.20). Whether the complex moves along the DNA or whether the DNA moves through the complex, either anchored or not, are unresolved questions that are under active investigation. ENDLINE
We cannot attribute the accuracy of DNA replication solely to the specificity of base pairing. Initial pairing errors between incoming nucleotides and those in the template strand occur at a rate of one in  nucleotides. However, errors in the completed DNA molecule amount to only one in  (10 billion) nucleotides, an error rate that is 100,000 times lower. This is because during DNA replication, many DNA polymerases proofread each nucleotide against its template as soon as it is added to the growing strand. Upon finding an incorrectly paired nucleotide, the polymerase removes the nucleotide and then resumes synthesis. (This action is similar to fixing a texting error by deleting the wrong letter and then entering the correct one.) ENDLINE
Mismatched nucleotides sometimes do evade proofreading by a DNA polymerase. In mismatch repair, other enzymes remove and replace incorrectly paired nucleotides resulting from replication errors. Researchers highlighted the importance of such repair enzymes when they found that a hereditary defect in one of them is associated with a form of colon cancer. Apparently, this defect allows cancer-causing errors to accumulate in the DNA faster than normal. ENDLINE
Incorrectly paired or altered nucleotides can also arise after replication. In fact, maintenance of the genetic information encoded in DNA requires frequent repair of various kinds of damage to existing DNA. DNA molecules are constantly subjected to potentially harmful chemical and physical agents, such as X-rays, as we’ll discuss in Concept 14.5. In addition, DNA bases may undergo spontaneous chemical changes under normal cellular conditions. However, these changes in DNA are usually corrected before they become permanent changes—mutations—perpetuated through successive replications. Each cell continuously monitors and repairs its genetic material. Because repair of damaged DNA is so important to the survival of an organism, it is no surprise that many different DNA repair enzymes have evolved. Almost 100 are known in E. coli, and about 170 have been identified so far in humans. ENDLINE
Most cellular systems for repairing incorrectly paired nucleotides, whether they are due to DNA damage or to replication errors, use a mechanism that takes advantage of the base-paired structure of DNA. In many cases, a segment of the strand containing the damage is cut out (excised) by a DNA-cutting enzyme—a nuclease—and the resulting gap is then filled in with nucleotides, using the undamaged strand as a template. The enzymes involved in filling the gap are a DNA polymerase and DNA ligase. One such DNA repair system is called nucleotide excision repair (Figure 13.21). ENDLINE
An important function of DNA repair enzymes in our skin cells is to repair genetic damage caused by the ultraviolet rays of sunlight. One example of this damage is when adjacent thymine bases on a DNA strand become covalently linked. Such thymine dimers cause the DNA to buckle (see Figure 13.21), interfering with DNA replication. The importance of repairing this kind of damage is underscored by the disorder xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), which in most cases is caused by an inherited defect in a nucleotide excision repair enzyme. Individuals with XP are hypersensitive to sunlight; mutations in their skin cells caused by ultraviolet light are left uncorrected, often resulting in skin cancer. The effects are extreme: Without sun protection, children who have XP can develop skin cancer by age 10. ENDLINE
EVOLUTION Faithful replication of the genome and repair of DNA damage are important for the functioning of the organism and for passing on a complete, accurate genome to the next generation. The error rate after proofreading and repair is extremely low, but rare mistakes do slip through. Once a mismatched nucleotide pair is replicated, the sequence change is permanent in the daughter molecule that has the incorrect nucleotide as well as in any subsequent copies. As you know, a permanent change in the DNA sequence is called a mutation. ENDLINE
Mutations can change the phenotype of an organism (as you’ll learn in Concept 14.5). And if they occur in germ cells, which give rise to gametes, mutations can be passed on from generation to generation. The vast majority of such changes are harmful, but a very small percentage can be beneficial. In either case, mutations are the source of the variation on which natural selection operates during evolution and are ultimately responsible for the appearance of new species. (You’ll learn more about this process in Unit Three.) The balance between complete fidelity of DNA replication and repair and a low mutation rate has resulted in new proteins that contribute to different phenotypes. Ultimately, over long periods of time, this process leads to new species and thus to the rich diversity of life on Earth today. ENDLINE
For linear DNA, such as the DNA of eukaryotic chromosomes, the usual replication machinery cannot complete the  ends of daughter DNA strands because there is no  end of a pre-existing polynucleotide for DNA polymerase to add onto. (This is another consequence of the enzyme’s requirements.) As a result, repeated rounds of replication produce shorter and shorter DNA molecules with uneven ends. ENDLINE
What protects the genes near the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes from being eroded away during successive replications? Eukaryotic chromosomal DNA molecules have special nucleotide sequences called telomeres at their ends (Figure 13.22). Telomeres do not contain genes; instead, the DNA typically consists of multiple repetitions of one short nucleotide sequence. In each human telomere, for example, the sequence TTAGGG is repeated 100 to 1,000 times. Telomeric DNA acts as a buffer zone that protects the organism’s genes. ENDLINE
Telomeres do not prevent the erosion of genes near ends of chromosomes; they merely postpone it. As you would expect, telomeres tend to be shorter in cultured cells that have divided many times and in dividing somatic cells of older individuals. Shortening of telomeres is proposed to play a role in the aging process of some tissues and even of the organism as a whole. ENDLINE
If the chromosomes of germ cells became shorter in every cell cycle, essential genes would eventually be missing from the gametes they produce. However, this does not occur: An enzyme called telomerase catalyzes the lengthening of telomeres in eukaryotic germ cells, thus restoring their original length and compensating for the shortening that occurs during DNA replication. Telomerase is not active in most human somatic cells, but shows inappropriate activity in some cancer cells that may remove limits to a cell’s normal life span. Thus, telomerase is under study as a target for cancer therapies. 