Now, let’s take a step back and examine how DNA is packaged into chromosomes, the structures that carry genetic information. The main component of the genome in most bacteria is a double-stranded, circular DNA molecule that is associated with specific proteins. A bacterial chromosome differs from a eukaryotic chromosome in that the latter consists of a single linear DNA molecule associated with a large number of proteins. In E. coli, the chromosomal DNA consists of about 4.6 million nucleotide pairs, representing about 4,400 genes. This is 100 times more DNA than is found in a typical virus, but only about one-thousandth as much DNA as in a human somatic cell. Even so, that is a lot of DNA to be packaged in such a small container. ENDLINE
Stretched out, the DNA of an E. coli cell would measure about a millimeter in length, 1,000 times longer than the region it occupies in the cell. Within a bacterium, certain proteins cause the chromosome to coil and “supercoil,” densely packing it so that it fills only part of the cell. Unlike the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell, this dense region of DNA in a bacterium, called the nucleoid, is not surrounded by membrane (see Figure 4.4). ENDLINE
Each eukaryotic chromosome contains a single linear DNA double helix that, in humans, averages about 1.5 x 10^8 nucleotide pairs. This is an enormous amount of DNA relative to a chromosome’s condensed length. If completely stretched out, such a DNA molecule would be about 4 cm long, thousands of times the diameter of a cell nucleus—and that’s not even considering the DNA of the other 45 human chromosomes! ENDLINE
In the cell, eukaryotic DNA is precisely combined with a large amount of protein. Together, this complex of DNA and protein, called chromatin, fits into the nucleus through an elaborate, multilevel system of packing. Our current view of the successive levels of DNA packing in a chromosome is outlined in Figure 13.23. ENDLINE
Chromatin undergoes striking changes in its degree of packing during the course of the cell cycle (see Figure 9.7). In interphase cells stained for light microscopy, the chromatin usually appears as a diffuse mass within the nucleus, suggesting that the chromatin is highly extended. As a cell prepares for mitosis, its chromatin coils and folds up (condenses), eventually forming a characteristic number of short, thick metaphase chromosomes that are distinguishable from each other with the light microscope. ENDLINE
Though interphase chromatin is generally much less condensed than the chromatin of mitotic chromosomes, it shows several of the same levels of higher-order packing. The basic organizational unit of chromatin is the 10-nm fiber: nucleosomes joined by linker DNA. The 10-nm fiber is further compacted and also folded into looped domains. Even during interphase, the centromeres and telomeres of chromosomes, as well as other chromosomal regions in some cells, exist in a highly condensed state similar to that seen in a metaphase chromosome. This type of interphase chromatin, visible as irregular clumps with a light microscope, is called heterochromatin, to distinguish it from the less compacted, more dispersed euchromatin (“true chromatin”). Because of its compaction, heterochromatic DNA is largely inaccessible to the machinery in the cell responsible for transcribing the genetic information coded in the DNA, a crucial early step in gene expression. In contrast, the looser packing of euchromatin makes its DNA accessible to this machinery, so the genes present in euchromatin are available for transcription. ENDLINE
The chromosome is a dynamic structure that is condensed, loosened, modified, and remodeled as necessary for various cell processes, including mitosis, meiosis, and gene activity. Certain chemical modifications of histones affect the state of chromatin condensation and also have multiple effects on gene activity (as you’ll see in Concept 15.2). 