The discovery of the structure of DNA marked a milestone in biology and changed the course of biological research. Most notable was the realization that the two strands of a DNA molecule are complementary to each other. This fundamental structural property of DNA is the basis for nucleic acid hybridization, the base pairing of one strand of a nucleic acid to a complementary sequence on a different nucleic acid strand. Nucleic acid hybridization forms the foundation of virtually every technique used in genetic engineering, the direct manipulation of genes for practical purposes. Genetic engineering has launched a revolution in fields as varied as agriculture, criminal law, and medical and basic biological research. In this section, we’ll describe several of the most important techniques and their uses. ENDLINE
A molecular biologist studying a particular gene faces a challenge. Naturally occurring DNA molecules are very long, and a single molecule usually carries many genes. Moreover, in many eukaryotic genomes, genes occupy only a small proportion of the chromosomal DNA, the rest being noncoding nucleotide sequences. A single human gene, for example, might constitute only 1/100,000 of a chromosomal DNA molecule. As a further complication, the distinctions between a gene and the surrounding DNA are subtle, consisting only of differences in nucleotide sequence. To work directly with specific genes, scientists have developed methods for preparing well-defined segments of DNA in multiple identical copies, a process called DNA cloning. ENDLINE
Most methods for cloning pieces of DNA in the laboratory share certain general features. One common approach uses bacteria, most often E. coli. Recall from Figure 13.14 that the E. coli chromosome is a large circular molecule of DNA. In addition, E. coli and many other bacteria have plasmids, small circular DNA molecules that are replicated separately. A plasmid has only a small number of genes; these genes may be useful when the bacterium is in a particular environment but may not be required for survival or reproduction under most conditions. To clone pieces of DNA using bacteria, researchers first obtain a plasmid (originally isolated from a bacterial cell and genetically engineered for efficient cloning) and insert DNA from another source (“foreign” DNA) into it (Figure 13.24). ENDLINE
The resulting plasmid is now a recombinant DNA molecule, a molecule containing DNA from two different sources, very often different species. The plasmid is then returned to a bacterial cell, producing a recombinant bacterium. This single cell reproduces through repeated cell divisions to form a clone of cells, a population of genetically identical cells. Because the dividing bacteria replicate the recombinant plasmid and pass it on to their descendants, the foreign DNA and any genes it carries are cloned at the same time. The production of multiple copies of a single gene is a type of DNA cloning called gene cloning. In our example in Figure 13.24, the plasmid acts as a cloning vector, a DNA molecule that can carry foreign DNA into a cell and be replicated there. The foreign DNA segment could be a gene from a eukaryotic cell; we will describe in more detail how it was obtained later in this section. ENDLINE
Gene cloning is useful for two basic purposes: to make many copies of, or amplify, a particular gene and to produce a protein product from it. Researchers can isolate copies of a cloned gene from bacteria for use in basic research or to endow another organism with a new metabolic trait, such as pest resistance. For example, a resistance gene present in one crop species might be cloned and transferred into plants of another species. (Such organisms are called genetically modified organisms, or GMOs; see Concept 30.3.) Alternatively, a protein with medical uses, such as human growth hormone, can be harvested in large quantities from cultures of bacteria carrying a cloned gene for the protein. Since a single gene is usually a very small part of the total DNA in a cell, the ability to amplify such rare DNA fragments is crucial for any application involving a single gene. ENDLINE
Gene cloning and genetic engineering generally rely on the use of enzymes that cut DNA molecules at a limited number of specific locations. These enzymes, called restriction endonucleases, or restriction enzymes, were discovered in the late 1960s by biologists doing basic research on bacteria. Restriction enzymes protect the bacterial cell by cutting up foreign DNA from other organisms or phages. Hundreds of different restriction enzymes have been identified and isolated. Each restriction enzyme is very specific, recognizing a particular short DNA sequence, or restriction site, and cutting both DNA strands at precise points within this restriction site. The DNA of a bacterial cell is protected from the cell’s own restriction enzymes by the addition of methyl groups (—CH3) to adenines or cytosines within the sequences recognized by the enzymes. ENDLINE
At the top of the figure is a bacterial plasmid (like the one shown in Figure 13.24) that has a single restriction site recognized by a particular restriction enzyme from Escherichia coli. (Various such plasmids are available from commercial suppliers.) As shown in this example, most restriction sites are symmetrical. In other words, the sequence of nucleotides is the same on both strands when read in the 5 primt to 3 prime direction. The most commonly used restriction enzymes recognize sequences containing four to eight nucleotide pairs. Because any sequence that is this short usually occurs (by chance) many times in a long DNA molecule, a restriction enzyme will make many cuts in such a DNA molecule, yielding a set of restriction fragments. All copies of a given DNA molecule always yield the same set of restriction fragments when exposed to the same restriction enzyme. ENDLINE
The most useful restriction enzymes cleave the sugar-phosphate backbones in the two DNA strands in a staggered manner, as shown in STEP 1 of Figure 13.25. The resulting double-stranded restriction fragments have at least one single-stranded end, called a sticky end. These short extensions can form hydrogen-bonded base pairs (hybridize) with complementary sticky ends on any other DNA molecules cut with the same restriction enzyme, such as the inserted DNA shown in step STEP 2 of Figure 13.25. The associations formed in this way are only temporary but can be made permanent by DNA ligase, an enzyme that catalyzes the formation of covalent bonds that close up the sugar-phosphate backbones of DNA strands (see step STEP 3 of Figure 13.25). At the bottom of Figure 13.25, you can see the stable recombinant DNA molecule that was produced by the ligase-catalyzed joining of DNA from two different sources. The end result in this example is the formation of a stable recombinant plasmid containing foreign DNA. ENDLINE
To check the recombinant plasmids after they have been copied many times in host cells, researchers might cut the products again using the same restriction enzyme, expecting two DNA fragments, one the size of the plasmid and one the size of the inserted DNA. To separate and visualize the fragments, they would next carry out a technique called gel electrophoresis, which uses a gel made of a polymer as a sieve to separate a mixture of nucleic acid fragments by length (Figure 13.26). Gel electrophoresis is used in conjunction with many different techniques in molecular biology. ENDLINE
Now, what about the foreign DNA to be inserted in the cloning vector? Most researchers have some sequence information about the DNA fragment they want to clone. Using this information, they can start with the entire collection of genomic DNA from the particular species of interest and obtain many copies of the desired gene by using a technique called the polymerase chain reaction, or PCR. Figure 13.27 illustrates the steps in PCR. Within a few hours, this technique can make billions of copies of a specific target DNA segment in a sample, even if that segment makes up less than 0.001% of the total DNA in the sample. ENDLINE
In the PCR procedure, a three-step cycle brings about a chain reaction that produces an exponentially growing population of identical DNA molecules. During each cycle, the reaction mixture is STEP 1 heated to denature (separate) the DNA strands and then STEP 2 cooled to allow annealing (hybridization) of short, single-stranded DNA primers complementary to sequences on opposite strands at each end of the target segment; finally, STEP 3 a DNA polymerase extends the primers in the 5 prime to 3 prime direction. If a standard DNA polymerase were used, this enzyme would be denatured along with the DNA during the first heating step and would have to be replaced after each cycle. The key to automating PCR was the discovery of an unusually heat-stable DNA polymerase enzyme called Taq polymerase, named after the bacterial species from which it was first isolated. This bacterial species, Thermus aquaticus, lives in hot springs, and the stability of its DNA polymerase at high temperatures is an evolutionary adaptation that enables the enzyme to function at temperatures up to 95°C. Today, researchers also use a DNA polymerase from the archaean species Pyrococcus furiosus. This enzyme, called Pfu polymerase, is more accurate, more stable, and costlier than Taq polymerase. ENDLINE
PCR is speedy and very specific. Only a minuscule amount of DNA need be present in the starting material, and this DNA can be partially degraded, as long as there are a few copies of the complete target segment. The key to this high specificity is the primers, the sequences of which are chosen so they hybridize only with complementary sequences at opposite ends of the target segment, one on the 3 prime end of each strand. (For high specificity, the primers must be at least 15 nucleotides long.) With each successive cycle, the number of target segment molecules of the correct length doubles, so the number of molecules equals 2n, where n is the number of cycles. After 30 or so cycles, about a billion copies of the target sequence are present! ENDLINE
Despite its speed and specificity, PCR amplification alone cannot substitute for gene cloning in cells to make large amounts of a gene. This is because occasional errors during PCR replication limit the number of good copies and the length of DNA fragments that can be copied. Instead, PCR is used to provide the specific DNA fragment for cloning. PCR primers are synthesized to include a restriction site at each end of the DNA fragment that matches the site in the cloning vector, and the fragment and vector are cut and ligated together (Figure 13.28). The resulting plasmids are sequenced so that those with error-free inserts can be selected. ENDLINE
Devised in 1985, PCR has had a major impact on biological research and genetic engineering. PCR has been used to amplify DNA from a wide variety of sources: a woolly mammoth (Figure 13.29); fingerprints or tiny amounts of blood, tissue, or semen found at crime scenes; single embryonic cells for rapid prenatal diagnosis of genetic disorders; and cells infected with viruses that are difficult to detect, such as HIV (in the latter case, viral genes are amplified). Also, PCR tests are used to accurately detect the presence of SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19) even in patients without any symptoms. ENDLINE
Once a gene is cloned, researchers can exploit the principle of complementary base pairing to determine the gene’s complete nucleotide sequence, a process called DNA sequencing. The first automated DNA sequencing procedure, called dideoxy sequencing, was developed in the 1970s by biochemist Frederick Sanger, who received the Nobel Prize in 1980 for this accomplishment. In the last few decades, “next-generation” sequencing techniques have been developed that are rapid and inexpensive. In machines that carry out next-generation sequencing (Figure 13.30a), a single template strand is immobilized, and DNA polymerase and other reagents are added that allow so-called sequencing by synthesis of the complementary strand, one nucleotide at a time. A specialized chemical technique enables electronic monitors to identify which of the four nucleotides is being added, allowing determination of the sequence (Figure 13.30b). ENDLINE
Next-generation sequencing is rapidly being complemented or even replaced by “third-generation” sequencing techniques, with each new technique being faster and less expensive than the previous one. In some new methods, the DNA is neither cut into fragments nor amplified. Instead, a single, very long DNA molecule is sequenced on its own. Several groups have developed techniques that move a single strand of a DNA molecule through a very small pore (a nanopore) in a membrane, identifying the bases one by one by the distinct way each interrupts an electrical current. This is one of the many approaches to further increase the rate and reduce the cost of sequencing; one model of this approach is shown in Figure 13.31. In Chapter 18, you’ll learn more about how this rapid acceleration of sequencing technology has revolutionized our study of genes and whole genomes. ENDLINE
Molecular biologists have long sought techniques for altering, or editing, the genetic material of cells or organisms in a predictable way. Their aim has been to use such a technique to change specific genes in living cells—either to study the function of a given gene or to try to correct genetic mutations that cause disease. Over the past 10 years, biologists have developed a powerful new technique for gene editing, called the CRISPR-Cas9 system, that is taking the field of genetic engineering by storm. Cas9 is a bacterial protein that helps defend bacteria against bacteriophage infections. In bacterial cells, Cas9 acts together with “guide RNA” made from the CRISPR region of the bacterial genome. (How this defense system works in bacteria will be explained in Figure 17.6.) ENDLINE
Similar to the restriction enzymes described earlier, Cas9 is a nuclease that cuts double-stranded DNA molecules. However, while a given restriction enzyme recognizes only one particular DNA sequence, the Cas9 protein will cut any sequence to which it is directed. Cas9 takes its marching orders from a guide RNA molecule that it binds and uses as a homing device, cutting both strands of any DNA sequence that is complementary to the guide RNA. Scientists have been able to exploit the function of Cas9 by introducing a Cas9–guide RNA complex into a cell they wish to alter (Figure 13.32). ENDLINE
The guide RNA in the complex is engineered to be complementary to the “target” gene. Cas9 cuts both strands of the target DNA, and the resulting broken ends of DNA trigger a DNA repair system (similar to that shown in Figure 13.21). When there is no undamaged DNA for the enzymes of the repair system to use as a template, as shown at the bottom left of Figure 13.32, the repair enzymes introduce or remove random nucleotides while rejoining the ends. Generally, this alters the DNA sequence so that the gene no longer works properly. This technique is a highly successful way for researchers to “knock out” (disable) a given gene to study what that gene does in an organism. ENDLINE
But what about using this system to help treat genetic diseases? Researchers have modified the technique so that the CRISPR-Cas9 system can be used to repair a gene that has a mutation. They introduce a segment from the normal (functional) gene along with the CRISPR-Cas9 system. After Cas9 cuts the target DNA, repair enzymes can use the normal DNA as a template to repair the target DNA at the break point. In this way, the CRISPR-Cas9 system edits the defective gene so that it is corrected (see the bottom right of Figure 13.32). ENDLINE
In 2018, researchers reported promising results using the CRISPR-Cas 9 system in an attempt to correct the genetic defect that causes sickle-cell disease. They edited human cells from sickle-cell patients and injected them into bone marrow in mice. After 19 weeks, the gene remained corrected in 20–40% of the injected cells. A 2021 study using an improved CRISPR-based gene-editing technique in a similar experiment showed the gene to be altered in roughly 70% of cells after 16 weeks. Researchers, physicians, and patients alike are excited about the potential of CRISPR technology to treat or even cure human diseases that have a genetic basis, such as sickle-cell, Alzheimer’s, and Parkinson’s diseases, as well as some types of cancer. However, there are still concerns about using CRISPR-treated cells in humans because of possible effects on genes that are not being targeted; this is an active area of research. The risks associated with cutting both strands of DNA with CRISPR are avoided when CRISPR is used in conjunction with a new technique called base editing. In this process, specific bases in a gene are not cut and replaced, but rather chemically modified to resemble a different base, thus altering the resulting protein so it is no longer harmful. ENDLINE
In another application of CRISPR-Cas9, scientists are attempting to address the global problem of insect-borne diseases by altering genes in the insect so that, for example, it cannot transmit disease. An extra twist to this approach is engineering the new allele so that it is much more highly favored for inheritance than is the wild-type allele. This strategy is called a gene drive because the biased inheritance of the engineered gene during reproduction rapidly “drives” the new allele through the population. ENDLINE
Jennifer Doudna (Figure 13.33), a co-discoverer of CRISPR-Cas9, recognized not only its incredible potential but also the danger of its misapplication. After having a dream in which Adolf Hitler asked her what could be done with this gene-editing tool, Doudna realized it was imperative to spend some time reflecting on ethical considerations. In 2015, she convened a conference of biologists who agreed at the end of the meeting to urge extreme caution as the field moves forward—and the discussion continues. ENDLINE
In this section, you have learned how understanding the elegant structure of DNA has led to powerful techniques for genetic engineering. Earlier in the chapter, you also saw how DNA molecules are arranged in chromosomes and how DNA replication provides the copies of genes that parents pass to offspring. However, it is not enough that genes be copied and transmitted; the information they carry must be used by the cell. In other words, genes must also be “expressed.” In the next few chapters, we’ll examine how the cell expresses the genetic information encoded in DNA. We’ll also return to the subject of genetic engineering by exploring a few techniques for analyzing gene expression.
